LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To achieve the grade of 12, students should meet the following learning objectives only with no or minor mistakes or errors. By the end of
the course the students will be able to:
1. Explain the concepts, models and methods introduced during the course.
2. Identify and perform an academically founded forecasting analysis in practice (including taking relevant theoretical relationships
into account) using the tools introduced during the course.
3. Discuss and solve any important problems encountered in relation to the analysis.
4. Evaluate the forecasts of the analysis.
5. Report/communicate the results and conclusion of the analysis both if the reader is a statistician/econometrician and if the reader
is e.g. a CEO.
6. Evaluate a forecasting analysis conducted by another person/researcher.
7. Use a statistical analysis software package for the analysis (e.g. R or SAS) and demonstrate that you can interpret and evaluate the
output from the software package.
Thomas Einfeldt, 2026 4
EXAMINATION (SELECTED POINTS)
Thomas Einfeldt, 2026 5
▪ Examination form Oral exam on the basis of a written product (the report), produced by a group of 3–4 people
▪ Individual or group exam Individual exam, based on the group’s report
▪ Size of written product Max. 15 pages
▪ Assignment type Group take-home project
▪ Report subject Subject chosen by the groups themselves
▪ Duration Report to be submitted on specified date and time.
▪ Grading scale 7-point grading scale
▪ Examiner(s) Two internal examiners
▪ Exam period Summer
▪ Re-take Same examination form as the ordinary exam. Students can submit a revised report.
IN ESSENCE
▪ Deadline for hand-in of report 29 May 2026 (12:00), group hand-in on Digital Exam
▪ Length of report: 15 page essay (we will not read anything that exceeds 15 pages)
▪ Group: 3–4 group members
▪ Oral exam: 16 – 19 June 2026
▪ Requirements: Find and use your own time series data.
Analyze your time series with at least 2 methods among the ones presented in the course.
Produce forecasts and discuss results.
(Based on statistical methods, i.e., not judgmental forecasts)
The report should be self-explanatory: Everything you consider relevant should be in the
main body (output, figures, tables). The code can be placed in the appendix, but this is not
essential.
Use R for analysis.
Window before the exam: You can email teachers in the course if you have questions about the exam. However, we
will not answer any emails the last two weeks before the deadline.
Thomas Einfeldt, 2026 6
ONE POSSIBLE WAY TO STRUCTURE A FORECAST REPORT
Thomas Einfeldt, 2026 7
▪ Introduction
Present the problem (what, why, how)
▪ Literature review
Optional
▪ Data
Source, frequency, main characteristics, stationarity, seasonality, need for transformation, structural breaks etc.
▪ Methodology – introduction of methods used, and prior assumptions (what, why, how)
▪ Presentation and discussion of results – tables and graphs with a focus on the interpretation of results and implications
▪ Conclusions
No need to include code in the main body, unless you think it’s relevant. You are also welcome to include code chunks in the appendix.
THINGS TO CONSIDER
Thomas Einfeldt, 2026 8
1. The number of observation should be enough to be able to forecast.
2. Data should be original, i.e. do not investigate the unemployment rate in the US or things that we have repeatedly seen in
class/workshops/assignments.
3. A “bad” forecast (fx, unreliable large confidence intervals) will not affect your grade as long as your methodology is sound.
(However, a bad forecast might indicate that you did something wrong or you did not use a suitable model.)
4. Do not spend too much space explaining the methodology (e.g. what is an AR1 model). Instead, explain why the chosen
methodology is right for the issue at hand (e.g. the AR1 model can describe this data because it has this and that characteristic).
Also, you can/should discuss why your model is preferable to other models (e.g. the ETS model can describe this data better than X
because …).
5. All forecast models are equivalent. You do not need to use a VAR with a GETS procedure to get 12. Most forecasts will probably be
based on:
A. ARIMA
B. ETS
C. Time series regression
D. Including dynamic regression
E. VAR
- with/without seasonality
WHAT WILL BE EVALUATED
Thomas Einfeldt, 2026 9
1. Your forecast methodology is motivated by the evidence in your data.
2. The methodology is presented correctly.
3. All relevant analytical steps are included.
4. Steps are in the right order.
5. Steps are discussed in a meaningful way.
6. The conclusion aligns with the evidence in steps 1-3.
7. The overall quality of the analysis, including overall “readability” of your report.
WHAT WILL NOT EVALUATED
Thomas Einfeldt, 2026 10
1. The type of data and their characteristics.
2. Difficulty of the methods employed.
3. Whether your forecasts are “good” or “bad” (as long as your methodology is correct).
